Okay, so where are we now?
So we have just been
through the logic of
mean-variance optimization
and we started with
the premise of decreasing
marginal utility,
and follow that all the way to
the concept of
efficient portfolios,
and talked about
how you can sort of
do this the hard way
or the easy way.
The hard way maybe
has more potential
to deliver a lot of
diversification benefit,
optimizing over lots of assets
but your output is only
as good as your input,
and you have to
bear that in mind.
We talked about the easier
approach of let's just say
the valuated market index is
efficient and just
leave it at that,
and there's some actual
justification for taking
that point of view or
we can take the point of
view that, well, okay,
it's a good idea to be
trading indices because of
the problem of
information asymmetries.
Private information of raising
transactions costs as
Dr. Sokoloff showed.
So if we're going to optimize
over individual assets,
why not have those
individual assets be
indices and then just
optimize over those,
so we can still keep our
transactions costs down.
So that's where we are and
what I want to talk
about next is,
what are this assets that
we can optimize over,
that allow us to diversify
across indices and basically,
there are two types
of assets that I want
to talk about here.
Number one is going to be
your basic open-end mutual fund,
let's call it mutual funds.
You're going to say mutual
fund but what I mean
is an open-ended mutual fund,
which I'll define in a second.
Think about Fidelity Magellan,
that kind of fund.
The other is going to be an
exchange traded fund with
this assets that are
now called ETFs.
ETF, exchange traded fund.
So those are the two things
I want to talk about.
Those really are the main
workhorses of the robo advisor.
It's going to be where they're
going to be putting your money.
So let's talk about each of
these and see how they work,
and how they're going to
be appealing to the robo advisor.
So first, mutual funds.
So your open-end
mutual fund has been
around since the 1920s.
It's a very simple idea.
So if I have a mutual fund,
then I'm managing money
and if you want to
invest with me, well,
you can give me 10,000
bucks of your money to
manage and then I would
take your 10,000 bucks,
I would put it in the fund.
So now my fund is
gotten bigger by
10,000 bucks and I got
to go put your money to
work by buying more shares or
whatever it is I'm trading.
What you get, you're
going to get shares of
the fund and at what price
you're going get shares?
Well, I'm going to calculate
the per share value
of my mutual fund.
So I value the whole portfolio
that I'm holding of
all the different things,
value it at the end of
the day and come up with
a dollar figure divided
by the number of
shares outstanding of the fund,
and that ratio is the value
per share of the fund,
and that's the price that
you're going to pay.
So that's your classic
open-end mutual fund.
People call it open-end
because your money is going
right in the fund
or coming out of
the fund later when
you want to get out.
Your investment is directly
making the fund
bigger or smaller.
Now, the mutual funds have
been around for a long time now
but this industry has changed
tremendously over the past,
let's say, over the past
40 years but especially,
let's say, just in
the past 10 years.
I would say 10 or 15 years.
This industry has changed the
most and the change I
am talking about is
a transition from a world of
active management to a world
of passive management.
So when I say active management,
that's what it sounds like.
You give me your money and I am
going to actively manage it.
I'm going to figure out which
stocks are undervalued.
I'm going to buy those.
If they're overvalued,
I'm going to sell them.
I'm moving your money around
the different possibilities,
based on my research,
my diligence that
I'm doing and with
the goal of giving you
an enhanced return.
I'm going to beat the market
with my analysis and
my trading skill.
So that's active management.
That was sort of
the whole world of
mutual funds if you go back
40 years but especially recently,
people have been moving instead
into index investment and
for two reasons really.
Number one, the track record
of active managers has
not been good on average.
So in a given year,
the fraction of
active managers that beat
the market is below half.
Most of them don't
beat the market.
Part of this of course is
they charge pretty big fees.
You might pay
one percent per year to
your active manager
to make his trades.
Whereas, if you invested with
an index fund they would
charge you far less, right?
You put your money
just an S&P 500 index fund,
you're not paying one,
hoping not paying
one percent, right?
I hope you're not because
you can get that for
less than a tenth of a percent.
That is, these index funds
they're not doing
much labor here.
They're not doing
a lot of research.
They're not doing all this work.
They would otherwise
charge you for.
They also not trading
very much, right?
Because they're just
buying the index.
So it's all going to
be a lot cheaper and
people have been
convinced by that logic
and money is moving from
active management
into indexing, okay?
One thing that means
is that these days in
the mutual fund space you
have a lot of choice,
there are a lot of different
index funds out there.
So just not say, don't take
my word for it go take
a look at all the
offerings at Vanguard,
Fidelity, whatever mutual
fund family you like.
Take a look, you'll see a lot of
different choices of index
funds; country index funds,
industry index funds, socially
responsible index funds,
where they have a screen,
so screening in or screening out.
Certain kinds of stocks based
on some sense of what is
more ethical then what else?
Lots of index funds that you
can choose from these days.
Okay. Now so that's your
open a mutual fund,
but let me just make a couple of
points here about
opening mutual funds,
I'm going to contrast with
the ETFs in a second.
Okay. Notice that,
when you trade with
an open-end mutual fund,
you're putting money
in the fund so
your investment makes
the fund trade, okay?
Now that can be some amount of
drain on the fund
that people go in and out
and going in and out,
makes the fund trade
because it has
transactions costs, right?
So there's that.
There's also another thing
which is that,
if you want to invest
in an open-end fund,
there's only one time
of day that they trade,
which is the end of the day.
So if in the middle
of the day say, "Hey,
I think now's the time
to get in the market."
Well, you can make
an order for shares,
but you're not actually
buying shares until
the end of the day.
So whatever happens
in the market for
the rest of the day you're
not getting, right?
You're getting in at
the end of the day.
So bear that in mind too.
Also, a given fund family
is not necessarily going to
be accessible from
just any trading platform.
Okay. Trading platforms
can be sort of
signed up with
certain fund families
and not other fund families,
so you want to put
money some fund, well,
if your platform doesn't have it,
well, then it's
going to be tough.
Not impossible, because you can
contact the fund family directly.
Well, you can do it,
but it's just a bigger hassle.
Finally, a mutual fund
is generally going to have
a minimum investment.
You can't very often put just a
$100 into an open-end fund.
They tend to have a minimum of,
at Vanguard I think their minimum
is 3,000 bucks for anything.
You've got to have 3,000 bucks,
if don't you're not putting
money in one of their funds,
okay, until you can accumulate
that much cash. All right.
So that's the world
of open-end funds.
Now let's think about ETFs,
Exchange-Traded Funds.
Now, as the name indicates,
these are funds whose shares
trade on the exchange, okay?
So they trade on the exchange.
That means, when you
buy shares of an ETF,
you're not putting
money in the fund,
you're just buying shares from
somebody else who's
selling them, okay?
Your money goes to the seller
and you get the shares,
but the fund itself is
sitting there untouched.
Okay. Your trade is
of no consequence,
direct consequence
to the fund itself.
Okay. So you're not
making the fund trade.
Now bear in mind,
there is going to
potentially be a transactions
cost on the market.
So maybe it's going to
cost you a penny a share,
maybe a few pennies a
share to make this trade.
So there's a transactions
cost on the market,
but you're not making
the fund trade itself, okay?
Also, another difference
from the open-end fund is,
because these shares are
trading on the exchange,
you can go in and out whenever
the market is open, right?
You can go in or out
whenever the market is open.
You don't have to just wait
to the end of the day, right?
So if you think right now,
I think I like what's
happening in the market,
I like this news that came out,
I think now is
the time for trade,
I can go in right now,
or if I get worried right
now I can get out right now.
So you can trade
whenever you want.
Also, you could in principle
just buy or sell one share.
Now that's an odd thing
to do in the market.
I just as sort of
it's possible, right?
If the share cost 100 bucks,
you could just buy one share
and invest a 100 bucks.
That is a doable thing,
what's not a doable thing,
the Vanguard,
there you would just
simply need 3,000
bucks or you just not
investing at all, okay?
So there's there's no minimum.
Okay. Furthermore, because
it's trading on the exchange,
you can access it from
any brokerage account.
Any brokerage account you can
trade stock trade and exchange.
There's no problem, if you have
a brokerage account
you will be able to
trade any ETF trading at the US.
Okay. So if you take
a look at what these
robo-advisors are going to do,
they're going to
focus on the ETFs.
They're going to focus on
the ETFs because you have
a whole range of
ETFs to choose from.
You can go in and out whenever.
ETF fees are even lower
than the index funds.
For the most part,
they're lower than
the index funds offered
by open-end funds, right?
Because ETFs it's actually
a little cheaper to run an ETF,
it's logistics of it are
cheaper than an actual fund,
they can charge
slightly lower fees.
So the robo-advisors
optimizing over,
for the most part, these is ETFs.
Because the ETF fees
are so low, right?
If you invested the robo-advisor,
you are paying fees
on fees, right?
You're paying fee to the
robo-advisor and you're
paying a fee for the investment
that they put you in.
But the fees on
the investments they
put you in a really low, okay?
So even you add
those two things together,
you're not talking about
a lot much per year.
You're not talking
about, for example,
whole percent per year, right?
Because both those fees
are pretty low, okay?
There's just always more ETFs
coming out. All right.
So if the robo-advisor
wants to optimize over
a wide range of
possibilities, well,
there are about 200 new ETFs
rolled out every year,
with just every possible
combination different sorts
of indices that you
might want to aim for.
So the robo-advisor can
sort of think at its level
about how to allocate
across these indices
and there's going to be
an ETF there to make that work,
to take that to the basket.
So this is what you're
generally going
to see in this space is that
we're going to optimize with
robo-advisor either you
take the valuate it
indexes efficient approach or
you take as other approach
you're going to
optimize over indices and
if you look at ETFs space,
there's an index for everything.
So that's a feasible
thing to do too.